---
layout: page
title: Guidelines for participants with corporate interests
---

The goal of the Trino community is to help all participants be successful in
using Trino in their environment, and is specifically not for the promotion of
any corporate interests including marketing, sales, recruiting, and other
activities. There are cases where the goal of supporting the Trino community and
promotion of corporate interests can overlap or even contradict each other, and
these guidelines are designed to help understand the line between the two.

## Technical support

For products that integrate with or extend Trino, we encourage the project
owners to support Trino users asking for help with integration or extension. For
long discussions about product-specific issues, we recommend that these be taken
to an external forum dedicated to the product. If product support is commonly
needed, we may create a separate group (e.g., Slack channel) to assist the
community with the integration.

Additionally, restrict your responses to the questions being asked.
Representatives from other vendors, while responding to a question, should not
use that opportunity to nudge users to use a specific vendor’s offerings, unless
the question relates specifically to a feature available in their product
offering.

## Marketing

Overtly selling products or services should be avoided (whether related or
unrelated to Trino).

The promotion of marketing materials with content that is very specific to a
company’s products or services should not be shared in Trino community spaces.
However, if a dedicated channel for supporting a product integration has been
created, we encourage you to post informational announcements about releases,
fixes, etc. relevant to the Trino community there.

While opinions about general technology and aspects of the big data ecosystem
are welcome, opinions about any specific product offerings or features should be
avoided when there is a conflict of interest.

## Recruiting

We encourage everyone to post information about Trino-specific jobs, contracts,
and internships to the `#jobs` Slack channel.

## Features

We encourage everyone to work on improving Trino, even when it eliminates the
competitive advantage of a vendor. When discussing these projects it is expected
that everyone operates in the best interests of the community, and does not
block or even discourage work on such features for anti-competitive reasons.

## Questions

If you have any questions about the above guidelines, email
`{{site.conduct_email}}`.