---
layout: post
title: "A glimpse at the summit"
author: "Manfred Moser, Monica Miller, Anna Schibli"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/blog/trino-summit-2024/lineup-blog-banner.png
---

Our efforts around [Trino Summit 2024]({% post_url
2024-07-11-trino-summit-2024-call-for-speakers%}) are ramping up and the event
is creeping closer and closer. We are really looking forward to the two-day,
free, virtual event in December about all things Trino.

While we are working hard to put together the [SQL basecamps before Trino Summit
training sessions]({% post_url 2024-10-07-sql-basecamps %}) and [other community
events]({{site.baseurl}}/community.html#events), a number of your awesome peers
from the Trino community submitted session proposals, and we are excited to
share that glimpse on the agenda for Trino Summit 2024.

<!--more-->

## First batch of sessions

Let's see what already settled on the agenda.

### Running Trino as exabyte-scale data warehouse

Presented by Alagappan Maruthappan from [Netflix](https://netflix.com)

Netflix operates over 15 Trino clusters, efficiently handling more than 10
million queries each month. As the initial creator of the Apache Iceberg,
Netflix has over 1 million Iceberg tables extensively using the Trino Iceberg
connector. In this session we talk about the operational challenges faced,
internal efficiency improvements, and our experience with upgrading to the
latest Trino version.

### A Lakehouse that simply works

Presented by Vincenzo Cassaro from [Prezi](https://prezi.com/)

With the billions of tech and vendor proposal, it's easy to loose track of what
truly matters. Vincenzo would like to show how a simple combination of established,
maintained, open source technologies can make a lakehouse that truly works for a
150M users company.

### How Trino and dbt unleashed many-to-many interoperability at Bazaar

Presented by Shahzad Siddiqi, Siddique Ahmad, and Usman Ghani from
[Bazaar]({{site.baseurl}}/users.html#bazaar_technologies)

Learn how Bazaar leveraged the combined power of Trino and dbt to scale their
data platform effectively. This talk delves into the strategies and technologies
used to enable many-to-many integration, fueling data-driven decision-making
across the organization.

### Maximizing cost efficiency in data analytics with Trino and Iceberg

Presented by Gopi Bhagavathula from [Branch](https://www.branch.io/)

At Branch, we realized that our existing architecture, was not only expensive
but also becoming unsustainable as data volumes grew for one of our business
units and we decided to adopt Trino and Apache Iceberg. Our journey of migrating
from Apache Druid to Trino and Iceberg taught us that the right combination of
tools can transform data analytics for one of our internal business units,
offering the perfect balance between cost savings, performance, and scalability.
Learn more how we achieved 7-figure savings with a few “compromises”.

### Using Trino as a strangler fig

Presented by Trevor Kennedy from [Fanduel](https://www.fanduel.com/)

This talk discusses how FanDuel uses Trino to migrate analysts from Redshift to
Delta Lake using Martin Fowler's Strangler Fig pattern. Trino slowly took roots
after initial trials, started replacing parts of the legacy system, and
eventually will be a complete replacement with a shadow of the original system.

### Enduring with persistence to reach the summit

Presented by Martin Traverso from [Starburst]({{site.baseurl}}/users.html#starburst)

In the keynote Martin presents the latest and greatest news from the Trino
project and the Trino community. With more contributors, more maintainers, and a
larger community we got a lot done since Trino Fest in June. Find out the
details from the co-creator of Trino.

Surely, you don't need any more convincing and you are ready to proceed to 

<div class="card-deck spacer-30">
    <a class="btn btn-orange" href="https://www.starburst.io/info/trino-summit-2024/?utm_medium=trino&utm_source=website&utm_campaign=NORAM-FY25-Q4-CM-Trino-Summit-2024-IMC-Upgrade&utm_content=blog-2">
        Register to attend!
    </a>
</div>

## Continued call for speakers

Now that you registered and saw what others have submitted and got accepted, we
are sure you are thinking:

> Well, thats interesting, but I can submit a talk like that and even better!

We agree and know you are up to it, so go ahead and submit a proposal:

<div class="card-deck spacer-30">
    <a class="btn btn-orange" href="https://sessionize.com/trino-summit-2024">
        Submit a talk!
    </a>
</div>
<br />

And if necessary, check the [original announcement]({% post_url
2024-07-11-trino-summit-2024-call-for-speakers%}) for more tips and ideas.

## Sponsor Trino Summit

To make the event a smashing hit, we are also looking for more sponsors.
Starburst, as the organizing sponsor of the event, is excited and interested to
collaborating with other organizations from the Trino community. If you are
interested in sponsoring, email
[events@starburstdata.com](mailto:events@starburstdata.com?subject=Sponsor%20Trino%20Summit)
for information.
